Document MusicBrainz Server release instructions (#2340)
metabrainz/musicbrainz-server: RELEASING.md

# MusicBrainz Server release process

> Note: This document covers steps for releasing new versions of MusicBrainz
> Server and deploying it online, which is only performed by maintainers.
> It includes discussion about servers and private repositories which other
> contributors won’t have access to. It can still be of public interest.

## Table of contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Setup](#setup)
- [Provisioning](#provisioning)
- [Updating Jira](#updating-jira)
- [Blog](#blog)
- [Tag](#tag)
- [Releasing musicbrainz-docker](#releasing-musicbrainz-docker)
- [Releasing beta](#releasing-beta)
- [Releasing test](#releasing-test)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Prerequisites

1. Perl module Locale::PO

   For updating translations, also part of `production` server features in `cpanfile`.

2. Transifex client

>    See the section “[Translations](INSTALL.md#translations)” in install doc.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
   See the section “[Translations](INSTALL.md#translations)” of the installation documentation.
```

  * [Blog](#blog)
  * [Add Git tag](#add-git-tag)
  * [Release musicbrainz-docker](#release-musicbrainz-docker)
- [Release beta](#release-beta)
- [Update test](#update-test)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Prerequisites

1. Perl module Locale::PO

   For updating translations, also part of `production` server features in `cpanfile`.

2. Transifex client

   See the section “[Translations](INSTALL.md#translations)” of the installation documentation.

See the private system administration wiki for additional prerequisites.

## Release production

### Update translated messages

Assuming the source messages were updated when releasing beta (if not, see that under the beta
process below first!), you need to start by updating the translated messages:

1. Run `./po/update_translations.sh --commit` to download the latest .po files
   from Transifex and commit them to the `beta` branch.

### Merge Git branches

1. Merge `beta` to `production` (`git merge --log=876423 --no-ff beta`) and push.
   Wait until [CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server) and
   [Jenkins (Selenium)](https://ci.metabrainz.org/job/musicbrainz-server/) are happy
   with this merge.

> 2. Merge `production` to `master` and push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Merge `production` to `master` (`git merge --log=876423 --no-ff production`) and push.
```
Always nicer to be able to just copy-paste the command :)

Author: Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/022a9f89ab6a250783030aed5b4e97f932729b3d

### Build Docker images

> Then, you must build new MusicBrainz Server Docker images from Jenkins, go to
> 
> 1. Go to https://ci.metabrainz.org/job/musicbrainz-docker-images/

Reviewer: go to: 1. Go to  :) Maybe just do:
```suggestion
Then, you must build new MusicBrainz Server Docker images from Jenkins:

1. Go to https://ci.metabrainz.org/job/musicbrainz-docker-images/
```

Author: Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/8b1f15982cac04676edbd628fd00315ea60fab12

> 2. “Build with Parameters” (in the left), and enter `production` for _IMAGE_BRANCH_.

Reviewer: We should also build and release a beta image with the updated translations so that they remain in sync, no? :)

Author: This is not something we have been doing so far but to backport critical patches from production to beta, mainly because we were lacking bandwidth and having beta translations out-of-sync for one week was not the worse thing about translation at that time.

But yes, it would be better for beta users and make using beta more attractive too. Feel free to do it when you have time.

The translation integration workflow will be drastically changed when switching to Weblate (still at the debug stage for weeks) with more fine-grained automated commits rather than the current batch manual commits.

Reviewer: I've always done that when I released for the last few months (build both beta and production and push updates of both), but I guess it makes sense to keep this as-is for now and just consider how the whole thing will work with weblate :)

Author: I didn’t know, that’s great :)
Ok to keep it as-is for now.

1. Make sure a new release version is present in the
   [Jira project administration panel](https://tickets.metabrainz.org/projects/MBS?selectedItem=com.atlassian.jira.jira-projects-plugin:release-page).

2. Close all tickets
   [`status = "In Beta Testing" and project = MBS`](http://tickets.musicbrainz.org/secure/IssueNavigator.jspa?reset=true&jqlQuery=status+%3D+%22In+Beta+Testing%22+and+project+%3D+mbs)
   as "Fixed."

3. Make sure all the tickets have a type that makes sense, enough information
   to be understandable, and the appropriate components set.

4. Release the current version. All open tickets should be moved to the next
   version.

5. Archive any previous versions still marked as "Released", except for
   the latest schema change release.

### Blog

[Create a new draft from the template](https://wordpress.com/post/blog.metabrainz.org?jetpack-copy=8634).
The list of tickets can be copied from the auto-generated release notes,
by going to the [Releases](http://tickets.musicbrainz.org/browse/MBS#selectedTab=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.project%3Aversions-panel) tab,
selecting the version you just released,
and clicking “Release Notes” in the top.

> Move sub-tasks of MBS-8609 to ending “React Conversion Task” section,
> and move other sub-tasks under “Other Task” (or just “Task” section if no React conversion task).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Move sub-tasks of MBS-8609 to the “React Conversion Task” section at the end,
and move other sub-tasks under the “Other Task” section (rename to just “Task”
if there are no React conversion tasks in this release).
```

Author: (This paragraph was copied as-is.)

Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/2b6a6ba93e309f1c3953db81a04eccd5ffd43f76

> Thanks reporters of each addressed issue at least, and every other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thank reporters of each addressed issue at least, and every other
```

Author: Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/ed296b568bc0ae0e9c589bedad0cb6c76283b35f

      from Transifex and commit them to the `master` branch

   2. Run `./po/update_pot.sh` to generate new .pot files from the
      database and templates. It's often a good idea to manually check
      the changes to the .pot files: this is a good moment to find typos
      that were missed during code review, or small changes to lines that
      don't seem useful enough to justify breaking the existing translations.
      If you find any of these, you might want to correct the issues and
      generate the files again. Once you're done, commit the changes.

   3. Push the `.pot` files generated in step 2 to Transifex. To push only the
      ones that changed, give a comma-separated list:

      ```sh
      cd po/
      tx push -s -r musicbrainz.server,musicbrainz.instruments
      ```

      If you want to push languages, keep in mind you need to push
      `musicbrainz.languages-9` (not `musicbrainz.languages`).

   4. Push the commits from steps 1 & 2 to `master`.

2. On the git branches merge step, to update the `beta` branch with the changes from the `master` branch,
   merge `master` into `beta` (with `git merge --log=876423 --no-ff master`) and push to `beta`.

>    (Skip this, of course, if you're just deploying changes pushed directly to the `bet`a branch.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (Skip this, of course, if you're just deploying changes pushed directly to the `beta` branch.)
```

Author: Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/31755b97cacd22d799941cad257e9b62153eda1f

3. On the [build Docker images step](#build-docker-images),
   enter `beta` for _IMAGE_BRANCH_ when doing “Build with Parameters”.
   Wait until the build has completed.

4. On the [deployment’s announcement step](#announce-the-deployment),
   [set the banner message on beta](https://beta.musicbrainz.org/admin/banner/edit) to

   ```html
   Beta website is being updated, slowdowns may occur for a few minutes, thanks for your patience.
   ```

5. On the [deployment step](#deploy-to-production) itself,
   run `./script/update_containers.sh beta`. Wait until the deployment has completed.

   Notes:

>    - Background task runners follow the `production` branch only,
>      which means that new reports are not available on the beta website for now.

Reviewer: It seems good to have the report testable by running it once by hand, so maybe:

```suggestion
   - Background task runners follow the `production` branch only,
     which means that new reports are not available on the beta website for now.
     If you want users to be able to test the report, you can run it once by hand
     to create a static version unless you run the report by hand from a beta container
     (see `[HACKING-PROD.md](HACKING-PROD.md)` for instructions).
```

And adding a small section to HACKING-PROD.md with the command to run?

Reviewer: Oh! I see you gave instructions for this on https://github.com/metabrainz/syswiki/pull/44/ anyway :) Commenting there.

Author: Answered on it.

   - The banner’s website is updated only after updating tickets; see below.

6. On the [Jira step](#update-jira), set all the tickets
   [`status = "In Development Branch" and project = MBS`](http://tickets.musicbrainz.org/secure/IssueNavigator.jspa?reset=true&jqlQuery=status+%3D+%22In+Development+Branch%22+and+project+%3D+mbs)
   as status "In Beta Testing." For tickets which fixed a beta-only issue not
   present in production, close the ticket as fixed and set the fix version
   to "Beta." Make sure all the tickets have a type that makes sense, enough information
   to be understandable, and the appropriate components set.

   Notes: None of the following steps are involved in releasing beta:
   - Blog
   - Add git tag
   - Release `musicbrainz-docker`

7. Again, [set the banner message on beta](https://beta.musicbrainz.org/admin/banner/edit) to

   ```html
   Beta MusicBrainz Server has been updated on Month DD, see the list of <a href="https://tickets.metabrainz.org/issues/?filter=10715">tickets available for beta testing</a>.
   ```
## Update test

Unlike production and beta, test is more flexible:
- The `test` branch is not protected and can be force-pushed,

>   even though you have to check in with other developers that may be using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  but please make sure no other developer is using it and ask for permission if they are.
```

Author: > Maybe something like this?

Genuine question: Is the original sentence not proper English?

> If you can figure out that the code being tested is already in production, for example, there's no need to ask

It is hard to figure out because the test container can be manually patched too, so it is not necessarily running the exact same code as in the `test` branch. So better ask in any case.

Reviewer: Well, it's not incorrect English, but I think it's a lot more clear to be more explicit, especially if you think asking should be a rule :) Maybe:

```suggestion
  but you should always check with the other developers to make sure they are not currently using it.
```

Author: Thank you! Committed as https://github.com/metabrainz/musicbrainz-server/pull/2340/commits/a42d7f05bbd17fc0f28146100402c7642455e326
